Add character counter example (#7)
szydan/gists: nodejs/character-counter/character-counter.md

# Character counter - program memory consumption
 

> Let us write a bit more complex program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us write a program that's a bit more complex 
```

> Let us write a program that's a bit more complex. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's write a program that's a bit more complex. 
```

The program will open a text file, read it's content and count the number each letter occurs in the file.
At the end the program will print a table with all the letters it found, next to each letter will be a number of how many times

> this letter occurred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that letter occurred.
```

> next to each letter will be a number of how many times that letter occurred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there  will be a number next to each letter of how many times that letter occurred.
```

### First implementation - memory consumption grows with the size of an input file

```js
const fs = require('fs');

if (process.argv.length !== 3) {
  console.log('Usage: node character-counter.js FILEPATH');
  process.exit(1);
}

function updateLetterCount(letterCount, letters) {
	for (const letter of letters) {
	  if (letterCount[letter]) {
	    letterCount[letter]++;
	  } else {
	    letterCount[letter] = 1;
	  }
	}
}

function printResults(letterCount) {
	let orderedLetters = Object.keys(letterCount).sort()
	for (const letter of orderedLetters) {
	    console.log(letter + ":" + letterCount[letter])
	}
}

const fileName = process.argv[2];
const text = fs.readFileSync(fileName, 'utf8');

//Introduce and object (map) to keep the results
const letterCount = {};

// Split text into array of letters
const letters = text.split('');

// Iterate over the array of letters and count them 
updateLetterCount(letterCount, letters)

> // print results in alphabetical order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// print the results in alphabetical order
```

printResults(letterCount)
```

To execute the program, type:

```sh
node character-count-1.js sample.txt
```

> Here the results;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is the result;
```

> Here is the result:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the results:
```

```
node  character-counter-1.js sample.txt 
	:192

:1970943
 :15975065
!:65581
":399570
#:11586
$:1757
...
```

### Improvements 

> The above program could be further improved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The program above could be further improved
```

> Here only a few things we could do: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are a few things we could do: 
```

> * print the letter statistics in better way, maybe as a graph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* print the letter statistics in a better way, for example, as a graph
```

* exclude special characters if we do not want to count them 
* save the results to a file 
* normalize the output numbers to a range from 0 to 1

> All the above improvements would be nice, however our program has one issue which is more important to address. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The  improvements above would be nice, however our program has one issue which is more important to address. 
```

What if we want to compute letter statistics for a very big file which contains millions or even billions of characters.

Then this line can be a problem

```js
const text = fs.readFileSync(fileName, 'utf8');
```

> The above line tell the computer to load the entire file into a variable text (memory).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It'll tell the computer to load the entire file into a variable text (memory).
```

> When the file is small (few hundreds of characters) our program will use very little memory, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the file is small (a few hundred characters) our program will use very little memory, 
```

> only a few hundreds of bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only a few hundred bytes.
```

> However if the file is huge it will use huge amount of memory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However if the file is huge it will use a large amount of memory. 
```

> To fix this we will use another method of reading files - streams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To fix this we will use another method of reading files called 'stream'
```

> Stream in computer programming refers to a data that is continuously flowing from source to destination. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stream in computer programming refers to a data that is continuously flowing from the source to a destination. 
```

> Stream in computer programming refers to a data that is continuously flowing from source to a destination. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stream in computer programming refers to a data that is continuously flowing from a source to a destination. 
```

When we use a stream to read a file we do not load the whole file into memory at once,
instead we read it in small chunks, one chunk at any given time. 

> This way our program will use only a small amount of memory at any given time regardless of how big the input file is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This way our program will only use a small amount of memory at any given time regardless of how big the input file is.
```

### Second implementation using streams - bounded memory consumption

```js
const fs = require('fs');

if (process.argv.length === 3) {
    console.log('Usage: node character-counter.js FILEPATH');
    process.exit(1);
}
const fileName = process.argv[2];

function updateLetterCount(letterCount, chunk) {
	const letters = chunk.toString().split('');
  // Iterate over the array of letters and count them 
	for (const letter of letters) {
	  if (letterCount[letter]) {
	    letterCount[letter]++;
	  } else {
	    letterCount[letter] = 1;
	  }
	}
}

function printResults(letterCount) {
	let orderedLetters = Object.keys(letterCount).sort()
	for (const letter of orderedLetters) {
	    console.log(letter + ":" + letterCount[letter])
	}
}

//Introduce and object to keep results
const letterCount = {};

const options = { bufferSize: 32 * 1024 };
const readableStream = fs.createReadStream(filePath, options);

readableStream.on('error', function (error) {
    console.log(`error: ${error.message}`);
});

readableStream.on('data', (chunk) => {
  updateLetterCount(letterCount, letters)
});

readableStream.on('end', (chunk) => {
  if (chunk) {
    updateLetterCount(letterCount, letters)
  }	

>   // print results in alphabetical order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // print the results in alphabetical order
```

  printResults(letterCount)
});
``` 

Note these lines

> The second parameter (options) passed to createReadStream is telling how much memory 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second parameter (option) passed to createReadStream is telling how much memory 
```

our program can use when reading the data from the file.
In this case we are telling it to use only 32kB (kilo bytes)

> Now even if we tell it to read a 1 GB (giga byte) file it would use only 32 kb at any given time

Reviewer: you used the phrase 'at any given time' a lot of times, maybe say something different

```js
const options = { bufferSize: 32 * 1024 };
const readableStream = fs.createReadStream(filePath, options);
```

To run it  

```sh
node character-count-2.js sample.txt  
```

And we get the same results 

```
node  character-counter-1.js sample.txt 
	:192

:1970943
 :15975065
!:65581
":399570
#:11586
$:1757
...
```

### How to test 

Lets prove that the memory consumption of the two programs is very different 
Open the activity/process monitor and put `node` in the search bar.

![](img/process-monitor.png) 

Now execute each version of the program while looking at the memory column

> Will notice that the version 1 is consuming much more memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will notice that version 1 is consuming way more memory.
```

> You will notice that version 1 is consuming way more memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll notice that version 1 is consuming way more memory.
```
